FastAPI path operations for Django developers (#430)
oddbird/oddleventy: content/blog/2023/fastapi-path-operations-for-django-developers.md

---
title: FastAPI Path Operations for Django Developers
author: ed
date: 2023-10-24
tags:
  - Article
  - Python
  - Django
  - FastAPI
image:
  src: blog/2023/fast.jpg
summary: |

>   FastAPI path operations are the equivalent to Django views. In this article we

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  FastAPI path operations are the equivalent of Django views. In this article we
```

  explore the differences, advantages, and gotchas of using them from the
  perspective of a Django developer.
---

> You might have heard about FastAPI, a modern and fast web framework for building

Reviewer 2: I'd consider linking to FastAPI here where it's first mentioned.

> APIs with Python. You might be wondering how it compares to Django, the most

Reviewer 2: Repeated use of "you might". Maybe combine these sentences, e.g:

"If you've heard about FastAPI, a modern ... with Python, you might be wondering how it compares..."

> popular and mature web framework for Python. In this series, I will try to
> answer this question by comparing Django and FastAPI on various aspects and
> features after we successfully converted an internal project from Django to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
popular and mature web framework for Python. In this series, I will answer this
question by comparing various aspects and features of Django and FastAPI, based
on our recent experience converting an internal project from Django to FastAPI.
```

FastAPI.

> 1. FastAPI path operations for Django Developers (this article)
> 2. SQLAlchemy for Django Developers (coming soon)
> 3. Testing a FastAPI application (coming soon)
> 4. How to use FastAPI dependency injection everywhere (coming soon)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. FastAPI Path Operations for Django Developers (this article)
2. SQLAlchemy for Django Developers (coming soon)
3. Testing a FastAPI Application (coming soon)
4. How To Use FastAPI Dependency Injection Everywhere (coming soon)
```

> 4. How to use FastAPI dependency injection everywhere (coming soon)

Author: I started writing an article that touched on all these points, but it felt unfocused and too long. I think we have at least three more solid articles to write in this series

> ## Why is FastAPI worth considering?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Why Is FastAPI Worth Considering?
```

*This section contains opinions. Skip to [Django Views](#django-views) for the

> actual comparison.*

Reviewer 2: I'd probably remove this -- opinions are helpful, and the title of this section already gives the reader a heads-up.

I discovered Django when I wanted to explore web frameworks outside the ASP.NET
and Windows ecosystem. I was impressed by its "batteries included" approach that
provides everything you need to build a web application, from the database layer
to the user interface. I also appreciate its "don't repeat yourself" philosophy
that encourages developers to write less code and focus on the business logic.
For over a decade, Django has been my go-to framework for building web apps that
are secure, performant, and a pleasure to work with.

In recent years, I have experienced two big shifts in the way I develop web
applications. First, I expect development tools to do more for me when it comes
to authoring software. Modern IDEs and code editors have really spoiled me with
convenient features like go-to-definition, auto-completion, and one-click
refactoring. This also means I expect languages and frameworks themselves to
encourage best practices and help me write better code. Static type checking,
automatic code formatting, and dependency injection are some of the features
that I have a hard time living without.

Because Django pre-dates Python's type checking system and it (rightly) wants to

> remain as backwards incompatible as possible, all efforts to leverage static

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
remain as backwards compatible as possible, all efforts to leverage static
```

type checking and deeper text editor integration have been bolted-on,
experimental, and incomplete. The main player in this space seems to be
[django-stubs], which provides type hints for Django as a separate package.
After using it for a while, my conclusion is that Django was not designed with

> types in mind, and efforts to add them are mostly futile. We won't go into
> details here, but let's just say that the time and effort of adding and
> maintaining type hints for a Django app is not worth the limited benefits.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
types in mind, and efforts to add them are mostly futile. The time and effort of
adding and maintaining type hints for a Django app is not worth the limited
benefits.
```

[django-stubs]: https://github.com/typeddjango/django-stubs

The second shift has to do with the proliferation of single-page applications
and the need for cohesion and consistency across the API and frontend layers.
Cohesion means that the API should provide a clear and logical way to access and
manipulate the data and services that the backend offers. Consistency means that
the API should follow common standards and conventions for data types, formats,
errors, validations, and documentation.

Developing APIs with Django means you're probably using the excellent [Django
REST Framework] (DRF for short). This package is a shining example of how Django
gives you complete and robust functionality with very little code (shout out to

> you, `ViewSet`). However, we can't deny that it suffers from the same problems

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
you, `ViewSet`). However, it suffers from the same problems
```

as Django itself: it was not designed with types in mind or to share information
about endpoints and serializers with consumers of its APIs. We tried to bridge
this gap with [drf-spectacular], which produces [OpenAPI] schemas from DRF views

> and serializers. However, its main limitation is that it relies on developers to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and serializers. Its main limitation is that it relies on developers to
```
